When you get to those numbers,
when you're talking about trillions and billions and all those zeros,
my brain just goes numb.
I,
there's this lack of comprehension that I'm well aware of.
Like those numbers get thrown about.
I go,
ah,
200 billion.
Hmm.
No I haven't.
It's just fruit.
And I think everybody does.
I think every scientist that,
no scientists can picture that number.
I mean he even the small number,
200 billion,
the number of stars in one galaxy,
and then when you say 2 trillion galaxies,
it,
you know,
that that's,
I challenge anyone to be able to picture that.
But it is the reality that we've observed.
We've,
you know,
we,
I mean we haven't canceled l 2 trillion by the way.
We have,
we have a thing called the Sloan digital sky survey,
which maps the positions of galaxies.
So you can,
you know how much of the sky you surveyed and you know how many galaxies you can
sit and then you can spread that across the wider universe and you get this
picture of a vast and possibly infinite universe meet.
We,
we know that the universe are very strongly suspected.
The university is much bigger than the piece we can see.
So we have good reason to think that's the case.
Whether it's infinite or not is another question.
And then that goes to your,
you know,
the,
can you pitch your infinity well,
no one can picture infinity does it.
This was a weird thing as well about,
you know,
we say the universe began 13.8 billion years ago.
So that's a measurement because we can measure the speed.
All the galaxies are flying away from us essentially.
And then you said you can run time backwards if you like.
So to find out when they were all on top of each other.
And so it's a quite simple measurement and we've done that.
So we say the universe began 13.8 billion years ago.
But actually all we know really was the universe was very hot and very dense at
that time.
And we have some theories that the universe was in existence before that and
perhaps some sort of circumstantial evidence.
And that means that actually the universe could,
could have always been there eternal.
And,
um,
when it,
when I talked to people,
sometimes they get a bit,
some people get upset about that.
Some people would rather it had a beginning.
The idea that it might have been around forever is more frightening somehow than
the fact that it began.
And,
uh,
it's,
it's interesting the way people's minds work.
What,
what terrifies you the most and eternal universe or a finite universe?
The other both incomprehensible.
The eternal universe.
W W if there was an eternal universe,
is that negate the theory of the big bang or does it mean that there is a
constant cycle of big bangs and then expansion and then recompression or,
yeah,
it could do.
So those theories are back in vogue.
Some of those theories are back in vogue again.
So yes,
some of them say that there's a cycling universe.
Um,
so the big bang is an event when space gets very hot and very dense and filled
with particles.
And that may happen again or some of the other theories.
Uh,
there's a theory called eternal,
which is a theory that,
and it's actually the most popular theory I think at the moment,
but what happened,
but why the big bang is the way that it is,
who's got some very special features,
a big bang,
which we could talk about it,
but inflation is the idea that space spacetime was around before the big bang
and it was expanding extremely fast.
And there was doubling in size in the most popular of these theories.
Every 10 to the minus 37 seconds,
which is point.
No,
no,
not with 37 knots.
One of a second.
So there's an only imaginably fast expansion.
And then the idea is that draws to a close,
so quite naturally sort of dies away in the expansion,
slows down and all the energy that was taken there was causing that expansions
sort of gets dumped into space and heats it up and makes particles.
And that's what we call the big bang.
And those theories that slight extension to those,
um,
say that,
that,
that slowing down just happens in little patches.
So most of the universe,
the overwhelming majority of the university still inflating that insane speed
and that just little patchy stop and their big banks.
So you get multiple universities,
a multiverse,
it's called the inflationary multiverse,
and we are in one of those bubbles.
And that's one of the more popular theories.